install.md, before:

# Mecodify
![N|Solid](images/logo3.png)

# Installation

Here you will find instructions for running Mecodify on your server.

### Interdepencies
Mecodify requires PHP, MySQL and Apache to run. Generally, most web servers already have them installed by default. But you can always double check in case. The three required depencies are PHP, MySQL, Apache.

1- **PHP 5.0 or higher:** If you are unsure if you have PHP 5.0 or higher, you can run the following command on the server:
```sh
$ php -v
```
In order to install PHP, you can refer to the official PHP installation instructions found here: [http://php.net/manual/en/install.php](http://php.net/manual/en/install.php) Note that the PHP-curl (libcurl module) needs to be enabled.

2- **MySQL 5.5 or higher:** Mecodify relies extensively on MySQL tables to store data. You can see if you have MySQL by running the command:
```sh
$ mysql --version
```

3- **Web server: recommended Apache 2.0 or higher :** Since Mecodify assumes your server has a web service, your server needs to have a service running. If you use Apache, you can confirm your version by running the following:
```sh
$ httpd -v
```

# Installation steps

### 1- Download the latest repo:
You should ensure that you have the latest version of Mecodify by cloning the latest repo on GitHub at [https://github.com/wsaqaf/mecodify/](https://github.com/wsaqaf/mecodify/). You can click on the ["Download ZIP" link](https://github.com/wsaqaf/mecodify/archive/refs/heads/master.zip). Upon downloading it to the folder where you wish to have it installed on your server, you can decompress it. 

### 2- Configure Mecodify:
In the main folder, you will find the file named `configurations_empty.php`. With any text editor, go into the file and add the missing values for each of the following variables:

#### Performance-related
You may want to adjust the following variables
```sh
$allow_new_cases=1;
$max_tweets_per_case=500000;

```
whereas:

- **allow_new_cases** indicates whether you would allow users to create cases. Can be handy when you reached your database storage limit or doing maintenance for example.
- **max_tweets_per_case** How many tweets could each case be. This depends on your capacity, API usage, user activity, etc. It is set to 500k by default.

#### Website-related
You need to fill in the following information
```sh
$website_url="";
$website_title="";
```
whereas:

- **website_url** is the exact URL that Mecodify will run on your website, e.g., https://yourwebsite.com/mymecodify.
- **website_title** is the title that will appear on top of each page. For example, if the title is "MECODEM Twitter Analysis", then that title will be shown as below with the addition of "(powered by Mecodify)".

#### Admin-related
```sh
$admin_email="";
$admin_name="";
```
whereas:
- **admin_email** is your email as the administrator of this instance of Mecodify. It should be the first e-mail to sign up. The admin enjoys a number of privilges including: Getting notified when a new user joins, a new case is created or edited, ability to view, edit, and delete any case (even those that are private). In the future, it will be possible to add a feature to approve new membership requests.*
- **admin_name** is your name as the administrator, which will be useful in communicating certain messages to regular users*

#### Database-related
You need to fill in the following MySQL database information
```sh
$mysql_db="";
$mysql_server = "";
$mysql_user = "";
$mysql_pw = "";
```
whereas
- **mysql_db** is the name of the MySQL database, which you can obtain from the MySQL setup.
- **mysql_server** is the name of the server, which is often `localhost` if you have root access to the server.
- **mysql_user** is the user name to access the database (must have all add and delete priviliges).
- **mysql_pw ** is the MySQL password for the above user.

#### Email-related
The below details are *optional* and are needed by the phpmailer library if you -as the admin- wish to receive emails when users sign up or create/edit cases:
```sh
$smtp_host="";
$smtp_secure="";
$smtp_port="";
$smtp_user="";
$smtp_pw="";
```
whereas:
- **smtp_host** This is SMTP host, which usually starts with (smtp.)
- **smtp_secure** can be "ssl" or "tls"
- **smtp_port** this depends on the type of service (usually 465 for ssl)
- **smtp_user** The username required for SMTP authentication
- **smtp_pw** The SMTP password required for authentication

#### Cleanup-related
Depending on how extensively you use the service, you may consider removing old cases that are no longer used to save disk space. Deleting cases would delete database entries as well as files associated with the deleted cases from your file system. The folder tmp is generally where the static files are saved for cases and they include files for logging (under 'tmp/log'), caching (under 'tmp/cache') and for experimental services such as network visualisation (under 'tmp/network') and for Kumu integration (under 'tmp/kumu'). Removing the files from the 'tmp' folder manually can also be an option for 'tmp/log' for cases that have already had their data fetching process completed (not still ongoing). Removing the files from 'tmp/cache' would mean that every time a new view of the graph and tables is made, it would require fetching the data from the database again. Removing 'tmp/kumu' and 'tmp/network' files would cause broken file links for experimental network analysis services. Another option is to simply compress the tmp/kumu and tmp/network files for particular cases that you want to archive or don't want to do network visualisation for. Saving those compressed files elsewhere and decompressing them if you wish to access them at a later stage would save substantial space since compression will be effective given that those files are textual (not binary).


#### Your own logo
Mecodify comes with a default logo available at `./images/logo.png`. However, you can of course replace it with any logo you like provided that it is of a size that could fit the upper left corner (preferably 120x750 px or smaller).

### 3- Configure Twitter API credentials:
Since Mecodify relies heavily on the Twitter API, you need to set up its credentials. If you haven't yet created a Twitter API credentials before, then you are recommended to check the API tutorial here:
https://developer.twitter.com/en/docs/authentication/oauth-2-0/application-only

Once ready, you will need to fill in the values for the following variables:
'bearer' and 'is_premium'

```sh
$twitter_api_settings=array(
         array(
          'bearer' => "/*brearer token for your Twitter APP to access Twitter's API V2.0 */",
          'is_premium' => /*true if you are using a premium account or false if you are using a free sandbox account
        );
```
### 4- Rename configurations_empty.php to configurations.php

### 5- Ensure that temporary folder are writable
The tmp folder and its subfolders need to be writable by the webserver for caching, etc.:
From the command prompt, you can change ownership of the folders recursively using the command
```sh
sudo chown -R www-data:www-data ./tmp
```
obviously, the name of the webserver account could be different (e.g., apache, www-data, nobody, www...). So make sure you apply the correct credentials.

### 6- Read the user manual, start experimenting:
You will need to check and confirm if all is working. The first step to do so is by reading the [manual](manual.md). If you succeed in creating an account and a case, then you have succeeded in your installation. If not, then you will need to go back to see where there may be a problem. Check the below troubleshooting tips and if all fails, you can reach out to us on [admin@mecodify.org](mailto:admin@mecodify.org) for help.
___

## Troubeleshooting
Depending on the problem you are trying to fix, there may be a host of things that you could do:

###### 1- Check if the installation steps are done exactly as required
###### 2- Ensure that PHP, MySQL and web service (e.g., Apache) are all functioning normally
###### 3- Ensure that folder permissions are in their original status except for the folders that  require to be writable (step 5)
###### 4- See if your server configurations allow PHP to execute shell commands, which is a requirement in `fetch_process.php`
###### 5- If all fails, email us on [admin@mecodify.org](mailto:admin@mecodify.org) to investigate further.

Commit message:

Added helpful scripts and instructions for faster deployment on AWS LightSail and DigitalOcean cloud services

install.md, after:

# Mecodify
![N|Solid](images/logo3.png)

# Installation

## AWS and DigitalOcean

If you do not have a server and have little to no experience in managing servers, then you could opt for pre-configured servers on two of the most popular cloud services, namely AWS and DigitalOcean. To learn more on how that can be done, you can use [https://github.com/wsaqaf/mecodify/blob/master/cloud_configs/README.md](this guide).

## Your own server
If you have an already existing server that you manage (e.g., VPS, Dedicated server, etc.), you will find instructions for running Mecodify on your  server.

### Dependencies
Mecodify requires PHP, MySQL to run and it usually works best in on a Linux device with PHP, MySQL and Apache (LAMP) stack istalled. Generally, most web servers already have a LAMP stack them installed by default. But you can always double check in case. The three required dependencies are PHP and MySQL.

1- **PHP 5.0 or higher:** If you are unsure if you have PHP 5.0 or higher, you can run the following command on the server:
```sh
$ php -v
```
In order to install PHP, you can refer to the official PHP installation instructions found here: [http://php.net/manual/en/install.php](http://php.net/manual/en/install.php) Note that the PHP-curl (libcurl module) needs to be enabled.

2- **MySQL 5.5 or higher:** Mecodify relies extensively on MySQL tables to store data. You can see if you have MySQL by running the command:
```sh
$ mysql --version
```

3- **Web server: recommended Apache 2.0 or higher :** Since Mecodify assumes your server has a web service, your server needs to have a service running. If you use Apache, you can confirm your version by running the following:
```sh
$ httpd -v
```

### Installation steps

#### 1- Download the latest repo:
You should ensure that you have the latest version of Mecodify by cloning the latest repo on GitHub at [https://github.com/wsaqaf/mecodify/](https://github.com/wsaqaf/mecodify/). You can click on the ["Download ZIP" link](https://github.com/wsaqaf/mecodify/archive/refs/heads/master.zip). Upon downloading it to the folder where you wish to have it installed on your server, you can decompress it.

#### 2- Configure Mecodify:
In the main folder, you will find the file named `configurations_empty.php`. With any text editor, go into the file and add the missing values for each of the following variables:

##### Performance-related
You may want to adjust the following variables
```sh
$allow_new_cases=1;
$max_tweets_per_case=500000;

```
whereas:

- **allow_new_cases** indicates whether you would allow users to create cases. Can be handy when you reached your database storage limit or doing maintenance for example.
- **max_tweets_per_case** How many tweets could each case be. This depends on your capacity, API usage, user activity, etc. It is set to 500k by default.

##### Website-related
You need to fill in the following information
```sh
$website_url="";
$website_title="";
```
whereas:

- **website_url** is the exact URL that Mecodify will run on your website, e.g., https://yourwebsite.com/mymecodify.
- **website_title** is the title that will appear on top of each page. For example, if the title is "MECODEM Twitter Analysis", then that title will be shown as below with the addition of "(powered by Mecodify)".

##### Admin-related
```sh
$admin_email="";
$admin_name="";
```
whereas:
- **admin_email** is your email as the administrator of this instance of Mecodify. It should be the first e-mail to sign up. The admin enjoys a number of privilges including: Getting notified when a new user joins, a new case is created or edited, ability to view, edit, and delete any case (even those that are private). In the future, it will be possible to add a feature to approve new membership requests.*
- **admin_name** is your name as the administrator, which will be useful in communicating certain messages to regular users*

##### Database-related
You need to fill in the following MySQL database information
```sh
$mysql_db="";
$mysql_server = "";
$mysql_user = "";
$mysql_pw = "";
```
whereas
- **mysql_db** is the name of the MySQL database, which you can obtain from the MySQL setup.
- **mysql_server** is the name of the server, which is often `localhost` if you have root access to the server.
- **mysql_user** is the user name to access the database (must have all add and delete priviliges).
- **mysql_pw ** is the MySQL password for the above user.

##### Email-related
The below details are *optional* and are needed by the phpmailer library if you -as the admin- wish to receive emails when users sign up or create/edit cases:
```sh
$smtp_host="";
$smtp_secure="";
$smtp_port="";
$smtp_user="";
$smtp_pw="";
```
whereas:
- **smtp_host** This is SMTP host, which usually starts with (smtp.)
- **smtp_secure** can be "ssl" or "tls"
- **smtp_port** this depends on the type of service (usually 465 for ssl)
- **smtp_user** The username required for SMTP authentication
- **smtp_pw** The SMTP password required for authentication

#### Cleanup-related
Depending on how extensively you use the service, you may consider removing old cases that are no longer used to save disk space. Deleting cases would delete database entries as well as files associated with the deleted cases from your file system. The folder tmp is generally where the static files are saved for cases and they include files for logging (under 'tmp/log'), caching (under 'tmp/cache') and for experimental services such as network visualisation (under 'tmp/network') and for Kumu integration (under 'tmp/kumu'). Removing the files from the 'tmp' folder manually can also be an option for 'tmp/log' for cases that have already had their data fetching process completed (not still ongoing). Removing the files from 'tmp/cache' would mean that every time a new view of the graph and tables is made, it would require fetching the data from the database again. Removing 'tmp/kumu' and 'tmp/network' files would cause broken file links for experimental network analysis services. Another option is to simply compress the tmp/kumu and tmp/network files for particular cases that you want to archive or don't want to do network visualisation for. Saving those compressed files elsewhere and decompressing them if you wish to access them at a later stage would save substantial space since compression will be effective given that those files are textual (not binary).


### Your own logo
Mecodify comes with a default logo available at `./images/logo.png`. However, you can of course replace it with any logo you like provided that it is of a size that could fit the upper left corner (preferably 120x750 px or smaller).

### 3- Configure Twitter API credentials:
Since Mecodify relies heavily on the Twitter API, you need to set up its credentials. If you haven't yet created a Twitter API credentials before, then you are recommended to check the API tutorial here:
[https://developer.twitter.com/en/docs/authentication/oauth-2-0/bearer-tokens](https://developer.twitter.com/en/docs/authentication/oauth-2-0/bearer-tokens)

Once ready, you will need to fill in the values for the following variables:
'bearer' and 'is_premium'

```sh
$twitter_api_settings=array(
         array(
          'bearer' => "/*brearer token for your Twitter APP to access Twitter's API V2.0 */",
          'is_premium' => /*true if you are using a premium account or false if you are using a free sandbox account
        );
```
### 4- Rename configurations_empty.php to configurations.php

### 5- Ensure that temporary folder are writable
The tmp folder and its subfolders need to be writable by the webserver for caching, etc.:
From the command prompt, you can change ownership of the folders recursively using the command
```sh
sudo chown -R www-data:www-data ./tmp
```
obviously, the name of the webserver account could be different (e.g., apache, www-data, nobody, www...). So make sure you apply the correct credentials.

### 6- Read the user manual, start experimenting:
You will need to check and confirm if all is working. The first step to do so is by reading the [manual](manual.md). If you succeed in creating an account and a case, then you have succeeded in your installation. If not, then you will need to go back to see where there may be a problem. Check the below troubleshooting tips and if all fails, you can reach out to us on [admin@mecodify.org](mailto:admin@mecodify.org) for help.
___

## Troubeleshooting
Depending on the problem you are trying to fix, there may be a host of things that you could do:

###### 1- Check if the installation steps are done exactly as required
###### 2- Ensure that PHP, MySQL and web service (e.g., Apache) are all functioning normally
###### 3- Ensure that folder permissions are in their original status except for the folders that  require to be writable (step 5)
###### 4- See if your server configurations allow PHP to execute shell commands, which is a requirement in `fetch_process.php`
###### 5- If all fails, email us on [admin@mecodify.org](mailto:admin@mecodify.org) to investigate further.
